[DOCS-11631] BigQuery Cost Allocation (#30722)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/cloud_cost_management/cost_allocation/bigquery.md

---
title: BigQuery Cost Allocation
description: Learn how to allocate Cloud Cost Management spending across your organization with BigQuery Cost Allocation.
further_reading:
  - link: "/cloud_cost_management/"
    tag: "Documentation"
    text: "Learn about Cloud Cost Management"
---

## Overview

Datadog Cloud Cost Management (CCM) automatically allocates the costs of your Google BigQuery resources to individual queries and workloads. Use cost metrics enriched with tags from queries, projects, and reservations to visualize BigQuery workload costs in the context of your entire cloud bill.

> ## Resources

Reviewer: I am not sure what this section is adding? Maybe it can be combined with the overview if there is anything important, otherwise I feel like the rest of the doc covers this. 
just my opinion, feel free to ignore me

> CCM allocates costs for BigQuery resources for both types of Analysis costs (on-demand and reservation-based). CCM displays costs for resources including query-level analysis, storage, and data transfer on the [**BigQuery** dashboard][1].

Reviewer: Can we maybe add a link here to the official bigquery docs on their various pricing models
Not everyone using CCM might know the difference between the two

## Prerequisites

The following table presents the list of collected features and the minimal requirements:

| Feature | Requirements |
|---|---|

> | Retrieve tags from labels of a query | Supported without monitoring or reservations |

Reviewer: Maybe say set up GCP CCM costs or something like that
So it is clear you have to have CCM GCP costs set up but you dont need anything else

Not everyone on this page might be a ccm customer

| Query-Level Cost Attribution | BigQuery monitoring enabled |
| Reservation Cost Allocation | BigQuery reservations configured |

1. Configure the Google Cloud Cost Management integration on the [Cloud Cost Setup page][2].
2. Enable BigQuery monitoring in your Google Cloud project.

> 3. For reservation cost allocation, configure BigQuery reservations in your project.

Reviewer: What does a user need to explicitly do to set up the bigquery logs? We should either list out the setup exactly or link to a page in the docs and say set this up

## Allocating costs

Cost allocation divides BigQuery costs from GCP into individual queries and workloads associated with them. These divided costs are enriched with tags from queries, projects, and reservations so you can break down costs by any associated dimensions. 

For reservation-based BigQuery costs, CCM allocates costs proportionally based on slot usage. Each query's cost is determined by its share of the total slot usage within the project's reservations. For example, if a query uses 25% of the total consumed slots in a project's reservation during a given period, it will be allocated 25% of that project's total reservation cost for that period. The cost per-query is calculated using the following formula:

```
cost_per_query = (query_slot_usage / total_slot_usage) * total_project_reservation_cost
```

Where:
- `query_slot_usage`: The number of slot-seconds consumed by an individual query
- `total_slot_usage`: The total slot-seconds used across all queries in the project's reservations
- `total_project_reservation_cost`: The total cost of the reservations in a given project for the time period

> Any difference between the total billed reservation cost and the sum of allocated query costs is categorized as a project's `cluster_idle` cost, representing unused reservation capacity. 

Reviewer: Lets be more explicit here. It is tagged with `allocated_spend_type:cluster_idle` and maybe also mention usage as well somewhere here for contrast

### Understanding idle costs

Idle costs represent the portion of reservation capacity that was paid for but not utilized by queries. These costs arise when the reserved slot capacity exceeds actual usage during a billing period.

> **Idle slot sharing considerations**: If your organization has enabled idle slot sharing between reservations, the idle cost calculation may appear different than expected. When queries from one project use idle slots from another project's reservation, those slot costs are attributed as "free" rather than to the consuming project. This means:

Reviewer: Is there a GCP doc we can link here with more info on how this is set up? Could be a good source to add

- A project's reservation may show higher idle costs if other projects are using its unused capacity
- The original project pays full reservation costs regardless of cross-project usage
- No automatic cost-transfer: Sharing projects don't pay the reservation owner for consumed idle slots

### Query-level tag extraction

> CCM extracts the following tags from BigQuery query logs via the Data Observability platform:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Datadog Google BigQuery integration is enabled, CCM extracts the following tags to add to your query costs:
```

What about something like this? I am not sure `Data Observability platform` is the public name or not. And `BigQuery query logs` might be confusing as well. We store them as logs on datadog but for the customer that does not really matter. What matters is if they have the integration enabled they get this feature. And hopefully they have it enabled because of the prerequisites, but they still might not so we should be clear they only get this when it is enabled.

Reviewer 2: Got it, I will also add in the link to setup bigquery monitoring here as well. thanks for the suggestion!

> | Tag | Description |

Reviewer: Any other tags we can add? What about the tag that has the raw query id, also maybe mention the tag for the region and project id as well because those are super important for bigquery

Those 2 they might know already but customers in general can never find the tags they need, so I dont think it is a bad thing to be a little extra verbose here with the top tags they would care about

|---|---|
| `reservation_id` | The reservation pool that provided compute resources |
| `user_email` | The user or service account that executed the query |

> | `dts_config_id` | Identifier for scheduled queries and data transfers |

Reviewer: Is there any way we can help customers understand how to take this value and use it to find their schedule in the bigquery ui? Otherwise this is just a random number that does not mean much to them

Reviewer 2: Yep theres a sectino for this on the dashboard, i'll add the same section here. Thanks for pointing that out

Additionally, CCM adds the following tags for cost analysis:

| Tag | Description |
|---|---|
| `allocated_spend_type` | Categorizes costs as either `usage` (active query execution) or `cluster_idle` (unused reservation capacity) |
| `allocated_resource` | Indicates resource measurement type - `slots` for reservation-based queries or `bytes_processed` for on-demand queries |
| `orchestrator` | Set to `BigQuery` for all BigQuery query-related records |

### Compute allocation

> For BigQuery compute allocation, CCM handles two pricing models:

Reviewer: Again it might be good to link to the bigquery docs here

**On-demand pricing**:
- Costs are directly attributed to individual queries based on bytes processed
- Includes query-level tags for detailed cost attribution

**Reservation-based pricing**:
- Costs of reserved slots are allocated proportionally to queries using those slots
- Allocation based on slot consumption (`total_slot_ms`) per query
- Includes idle cost calculation for unused reservation capacity

### Compute

Costs are allocated into the following spend types:

| Spend type | Description |
|---|---|
| Usage | Cost of query execution based on bytes processed (on-demand) or slot consumption (reservation) |
| Cluster_idle | Cost of reserved slots allocated within a project but not utilized by queries|

### Storage

Storage costs are categorized as:

| Spend type | Description |
|---|---|
| Active | Includes any table or table partition that has been modified in the last 90 days |

> | Long-term | Includes any table or table partition that has not been modified for 90 consecutive days. The price of storage for that table automatically drops by approximately 50%. There is no difference in performance, durability, or availability between active and long-term storage |

Reviewer: What tag key is this? It is good to in general try and provide a key+value so a user can find it themselves

## Further reading
 
{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

> [1]: https://app.datadoghq.com/dashboard/ecm-es8-agw/bigquery-allocation

Reviewer: Lets make sure we do not merge this PR until this dashboard is pushed to production and the link is corrected to the version that works in everyone's account. Otherwise this is just a link to the internal test version of the dashboard

> [2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/cost/setup 

Reviewer 3: See here for an example https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/blob/330f9acac5d9cabef17c5f45bf8c2836d7257836/content/en/cloud_cost_management/custom_allocation_rules.md?plain=1#L104 you can basically drop everything up to `/cost/setup`

> [2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/cost/setup 

Reviewer 2: Got it, thank you!

| `user_email` | The user or service account that executed the query |
| `dts_config_id` | Identifier for scheduled queries and data transfers |

To identify which BigQuery schedule a `DTS_CONFIG_ID` refers to:

1.  Go to **BigQuery** in the [**GCP Console**][6].
2.  Navigate to **Transfers > Schedules**.
3.  Use the **search bar** or **Ctrl+F** to locate the `DTS_CONFIG_ID`.
4.  Click the matched entry to view details about the query schedule, including source, frequency, and target dataset.

Additionally, CCM adds the following tags for cost analysis:

| Tag | Description |
|---|---|
| `allocated_spend_type` | Categorizes costs as either `usage` (active query execution) or `cluster_idle` (unused reservation capacity) |
| `allocated_resource` | Indicates resource measurement type - `slots` for reservation-based queries or `bytes_processed` for on-demand queries |
| `orchestrator` | Set to `BigQuery` for all BigQuery query-related records |
| `project_id` | GCP project ID where the BigQuery resource or job is located |
| `google_location` | The specific Google Cloud region or zone where BigQuery resources are deployed (e.g., us-central1, europe-west1, asia-southeast1) |

> | `resource_name` | Full Google Cloud resource identifier |

Reviewer 4: are project_id and resource_name directly from bills? But I agree these tags are useful for customers to understand the cost allocation.

- Includes idle cost calculation for unused reservation capacity

**Other BigQuery Costs:**
- **Storage**: Charges for data stored in BigQuery tables (active and long-term storage)
- **Streaming**: Costs for real-time data ingestion via streaming inserts
- **Data Transfer**: Charges for moving data between regions or exporting data
- **BI Engine**: Costs for in-memory analytics acceleration
- **Other services**: ML training, routine executions, and additional BigQuery features

CCM allocates and enriches costs for both query-processing pricing models, providing detailed cost attribution and tagging for your BigQuery analysis workloads. Learn more about BigQuery services and pricing models [**here**][3].

[**Learn more about optimizing BigQuery performance and costs.**][8]

## Prerequisites

The following table presents the list of collected features and the minimal requirements:

| Feature | Requirements |
|---|---|
| Retrieve tags from labels of a query | GCP CCM costs must be setup. Supported without monitoring or reservations. |
| Query-Level Cost Attribution | BigQuery monitoring enabled |
| Reservation Cost Allocation | BigQuery reservations configured |

> 1. Configure the Google Cloud Cost Management integration on the [Cloud Cost Setup page][2].

Reviewer: This link gives me a 404 error when I click it

2. Enable BigQuery monitoring in your Google Cloud project. 
[**Enable BigQuery monitoring here**][4]

> 3. For reservation cost allocation, configure BigQuery reservations in your project. [**Learn about BigQuery reservations.**][7]

Reviewer: I dont think we need this one to be honest. It is not really setup. Either they have it enabled and we support allocation or they dont and that is also fine. What do you think?

## Allocating costs

### Compute

Costs are allocated into the following spend types:

| Spend type | Description |
|---|---|

> | `allocated_spend_type`: Usage | Cost of query execution based on bytes processed (on-demand) or slot consumption (reservation) |
> | `allocated_spend_type`: Cluster_idle | Cost of reserved slots allocated within a project but not utilized by queries|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `allocated_spend_type:usage` | Cost of query execution based on bytes processed (on-demand) or slot consumption (reservation) |
| `allocated_spend_type:cluster_idle` | Cost of reserved slots allocated within a project but not utilized by queries|
```

I think this is a bit cleaner and easier for a user to copy into their query editor, what do you think?

### Query-level tag extraction

When the [Datadog Google BigQuery integration][4] is enabled, CCM extracts the following tags to add to your query costs:

> | Tag | Description |

Reviewer: You added one more tag recently right? The query has or something like that?
